so let's talk about some of the
differences between anemia of chronic
disease and iron deficiency anemia
because really these two diseases
present very similarly both of them are
going to have patients that present with
signs and symptoms of anemia so patients
that are chronically fatigued and
feeling weak looking paler than usual
and may be experiencing some shortness
of breath and really when you go to draw
the basic anemia labs take a look at
what's going on in the blood you'll see
that both of them are microcytic anemias
so really the only way to tell these two
diseases apart is to draw iron studies
so let's take a look at what some of
those values would show so here are some
of the values that you get back when you
draw iron studies and we already went
through this for iron deficiency anemia
but let's just do it again for practice
sake so with iron deficiency anemia
you'd expect your serum iron to be
decreased right hence the iron
deficiency part of it all the percent
saturation or the percentage of total
binding site on the transferrin
molecules that are actually occupied by
iron would also be decreased the total
iron binding capacity in iron deficiency
anemia is increased and we said that
that was the body's compensatory
mechanism to deal with the deficiency in
iron so what the body does to deal with
the shortage of iron is increase its
production of transferrin molecules it
makes more transparent puts it out into
the blood so that the transferrin can go
out there and bind to more iron to find
more iron and bind to more of it okay
and ferritin which is reflective of the
amount of iron that's in storage in the
body is decreased in iron deficiency
okay so those are the values for iron
deficiency anemia let's compare that
with what you're seeing any me of
chronic disease so just as an overview
once again anemia of chronic disease is
a disease where you have some underlying
inflammatory condition and as a result
of it you have an increased production
of a molecule called hepcidin and what
hepcidin does is it number one decreases
the absorption
I'm from the gut and it also decreases
the recycling of iron from the breakdown
of red blood cells so really what your
brought body is trying to accomplish in
this disease is it's trying to limit how
much iron is coming into the body and at
the same time it's trying to tuck away
as much iron as possible into storage so
that very little is present in the blood
in essence the body is trying to play
keep-away with the iron away from
bacteria and inflammatory cells because
they really need it to throw to thrive
and to grow okay so you'd expect that
the serum iron in anime of chronic
disease would be decreased that's
exactly what the body is trying to
accomplish it wants very little iron
present in the blood the percent
saturation which is again the percentage
of transparent binding sites that are
actually filled up with iron would also
be decreased the total iron binding
capacity or the amount of transferrin
that's in the blood in an email chronic
disease is decreased and again this
makes sense it goes totally in line with
what the body is trying to accomplish it
decreases the production of transferrin
so that there's less transparent out
there in the blood trying to bind to
iron okay
and finally the ferritin or which is
reflective of the total amount of iron
and storage in the body in anemia of
chronic disease is characteristically
increased and this is because once again
the body has tucked away as much iron as
possible into storage okay which is
reflective of what you see with ferritin
so really there are a couple of
differences between iron deficiency
anemia and anemia of chronic disease
firstly iron deficiency anemia is really
a disease of total body depletion of
iron and these lab values reflect that
very well especially the ferritin this
tells you that there is no iron in the
body not even in storage not in the
blood not in the storage not anywhere
anemia of chronic disease however isn't
necessarily a disease where you have a
depletion in iron instead you'll see an
increase in ferritin so that tells you
that there is iron in the body
it's just tucked away away from the axe
of bacteria and inflammatory cells now
also another difference between these
two diseases is that in a in iron
deficiency anemia the body is doing is
absolute best to increase the amount of
iron available in the serum and you see
that was a total iron binding capacity
it increases the production of
transferrin it does its best to try to
bring more iron into the body and into
the blood however an anemia of chronic
disease the body is trying to accomplish
the exact opposite it's decreasing its
production of transferrin so that you
have as little iron as possible in the
serum and the increased ferritin also
reflects that the body is trying to hide
away its iron in storage so in summary
those are some of the differences
between anemia of chronic disease and
iron deficiency anemia which again you
really rely on these iron studies to
differentiate between because they
present very similarly it's important to
keep in mind is that these are both
microcytic anemias